Imagine a plant
that, like all plants, captures
the sun's energy during the day.
But at night, it shines.
Imagine a blood bank
for emergency transfusions,
but made from artificial blood.
And as a bonus it doesn't spread disease.
Imagine an organism
able to capture carbon dioxide,
the one of the greenhouse effect gases,
and take it out of the atmosphere.
But not only that, it also turns it
into a usable form of energy.
Stop dreaming.
Welcome to synthetic biology.
Most of you have probably never heard
of synthetic biology.
But you will hear of it in years to come.
Biology is the study of life.
And synthetic doesn't come from
"short" or "summed up",
but from artificial,
that which is not found in nature.
As synthetic biologists
we design organisms
to help us accomplish something.
It can be something abstract,
like the study of life.
Or tangible, urgent things
like treating an illness,
generating clean energy,
or detecting a pollutant.
The novelty is how we modify or create
new living organisms.
And we achieve this by using,
designing and combining biobricks.
They are biobricks like Rasti,
Lego or Mis Ladrillos.
And each biobrick represents a function.
We can design a biobrick
that when we put in a cell,
it generates red color,
the smell of bananas
or hemoglobin, the one of the blood.
All biobricks are made of DNA,
the material in which
genetic information is stored.
And they are easy to combine
with each other.
So, a researcher creates ten,
a hundred, ten thousand biobricks,
and shares them with the community.
And each user takes them
and uses them to make their own organism
with the function they wish.
Not only do they use them,
they modify them,
combine them, give them other use.
They can create.
And the most wonderful thing
for us who are passionate
about the complexity of biology,
is that it works.
OK, we have a basket full of functions
enclosed in biobricks, what do we do?
We play!
We assemble, disassemble,
put in, put out, recycle.
Evolution recycles.
We synthetic biologists
come to be serial recyclers
who reuse and combine biological modules
to make organisms with tailored functions.
This can generate some fear.
Is it that we do what we want?
No! There are many controls.
For instance, the companies which make DNA
are forbidden to make toxins or pathogens,
so that no biological weapons are created.
And also the laboratories
that work in synthetic biology,
usually open their projects
to the community.
In my lab we receive visits
from industrial designers,
artists, sociologists,
and we explore
synthetic biology with them.
The fire burns.
The water drowns.
But we don't stop using them
because of that.
It's just about making a responsible
and safe use of them.
OK, but, what do we talk about
when we talk about organisms?
Human beings like pets.
Some of us like dogs,
other like cats, or plants.
Synthetic biologists
like bacteria and yeast.
They are microscopic
so we have many, many of them.
In ancient times we domesticated
microorganisms
to help us produce food.
Like bread, yogurt and beer.
Today we also use them to make medicines,
to produce energy, to study life.
But those are not all possible uses.
We could also use them to be more healthy,
to live better.
For instance, we could modify
some microorganisms
that live inside of us.
Yes, we have bacteria living inside of us.
In fact, a healthy human being
has about ten times more bacteria
inside of them than human cells.
Who could have wondered some years ago
that bacteria could heal?
Today we are learning
to understand these communities
of microbes that live inside of us
and how we can use them to live better.
I want to tell you my story
with synthetic biology.
The first time I heard
about synthetic biology,
I thought it was a fraud.
They invent a name to get money
or make themselves look interesting.
But when I understood what it was about,
it amazed me.
If with the old biotechnology
we could cut words from one organism
and paste them into another one
in a crafted and arduous way,
with synthetic biology
we can write, rewrite
and edit a complete book.
We have the full dictionary or,
even better, a complete library
in the computer.
And we can combine words at will.
One of the greatest milestones
of synthetic biology,
was the production
of the first artificial genome.
Many of you know that genetic information
is in the genome
and that we can make DNA in the lab.
Four years ago, in a lab,
they made a complete genome
from four bottles of chemical compounds.
They later introduced it inside a bacteria
turning it into a new species.
It's like changing the hard drive
of a computer
and installing another operating system.
What a tool!
And you don't have to be
a super genius to use it.
Most of the projects of synthetic biology
are powered by students.
From their enthusiasm and naivety
incredible projects come up.
In 2013, with a group of students
from the University of Buenos Aires,
we decided to study a problem
that hurt society
and that we could approach
with tools from synthetic biology.
We decided on the serious problem
of access to drinking water.
Around four million Argentinians
consume arsenic-contaminated water
every day,
in particular those who drink well water,
and they don't know this.
Or those who know don't have
an easy way to measure it.
So our goal was to design
an easy-to-use kit,
like a pregnancy test,
that allows the user to know
if the water from their well
has arsenic or not.
Remember the biobricks?
Well, we combined the function
of detecting arsenic
with the function of making color.
We put them together and placed them
inside a bacteria
and we turned it into
an arsenic detector, a biosensor.
We did this project
in the context of an international
competition of synthetic biology
where our team won
a gold medal and the award
for best theoretical model.
But we didn't just stay with the model.
We took field samples,
real ones, and it worked.
The next step is to create a casing
that contains the bacteria
and be able to distribute this device.
This is the current prototype.
You put some drops of water in a cup...
(Applause)
You put some drops of water
in a cup, wait a couple of hours,
and compare the color developed in the cup
with the reference colors.
Then you know how much arsenic
your well has.
I like to see it as an inspiring model.
When you know that something
cannot be done, you try.
But when you know that it can be done,
you go for more.
Today there are companies
using synthetic biology,
to produce vanilla essence.
They are using synthetic biology
to develop a cure for malaria,
or to make a spider web.
Today we can design organisms
that help us solve problems.
It's just about imagination.
To imagine an organism
that helps us protect the environment.
that helps us be more healthy.
To imagine an organism
that helps us generate clean energy.
Because we know that in synthetic biology,
imagination is power.
Thank you.
(Applause)